for most of our history human technology
consisted of our brains fire and sharp
sticks
while fire and sharp sticks became power
plants and nuclear weapons the biggest
upgrade has happened to our brains
since the 1960s the power of our brain
machines has kept growing exponentially
allowing computers to get smaller and
more powerful at the same time
but this process is about to meet its
physical limits computer parts are
approaching the size of an atom
to understand why this is a problem we
have to clear up some basics
[Music]
a computer is made up of very simple
components doing very simple things
representing data the means of
processing it and control mechanisms
computer chips contain modules which
contain logic gates which contain
transistors
a transistor is the simplest form of a
data processor in computers basically a
switch that can either block or open the
way for information coming through
this information is made up of bits
which can be set to either zero or one
combinations of several bits are used to
represent more complex information
transistors are combined to create logic
gates which still do very simple stuff
for example an and gate sends an output
of one if all of its inputs are one and
an output of zero otherwise
combinations of logic gates finally form
meaningful modules say for adding two
numbers once you can add you can also
multiply and once you can multiply you
can basically do anything
since all basic operations are literally
simpler than first grade math you can
imagine a computer as a group of
seven-year-olds answering really basic
math questions
a large enough bunch of them could
compute anything from astrophysics to
zelda
however with parts getting tinier and
tinier quantum physics are making things
tricky
in a nutshell a transistor is just an
electric switch electricity is electrons
moving from one place to another so a
switch is a passage that can block
electrons from moving in one direction
today a typical scale for transistors is
14 nanometers which is about eight times
less than the hiv viruses diameter and
500 times smaller than a red blood cells
as transistors are shrinking to the size
of only a few atoms electrons may just
transfer themselves to the other side of
a blocked passage via a process called
quantum tunneling
in the quantum realm physics works quite
differently from the predictable ways
we're used to and traditional computers
just stop making sense
we are approaching a real physical
barrier for our technological progress
to solve this problem scientists are
trying to use these unusual quantum
properties to their advantage by
building quantum computers
in normal computers bits are the
smallest units of information quantum
computers use qubits which can also be
set to one of two values
a cubic can be any two level quantum
system such as a spin in a magnetic
field or a single photon
zero and one of this system's possible
states like the photons horizontal or
vertical polarization
in the quantum world the qubit doesn't
have to be in just one of those it can
be in any proportions of both states at
once this is called superposition
but as soon as you test its value say by
sending the photon through a filter it
has to decide to be either vertically or
horizontally polarized
so as long as it's unobserved the qubit
is in a superposition of probabilities
for 0 and 1 and you can't predict which
it will be
but the instance you measure it it
collapses into one of the definite
states
superposition is a game changer
four classical bits can be in one of two
to the power of four different
configurations at a time that's 16
possible combinations out of which you
can use just one
four qubits in superposition however can
be in all of those 16 combinations at
once
this number grows exponentially with
each extra qubit
20 of them can already store a million
values in parallel
a really weird and unintuitive property
qubits can have is entanglement a close
connection that makes each of the qubits
react to a change in the other state
instantaneously no matter how far they
are apart
this means that when measuring just one
entangled qubit you can directly deduce
properties of its partners without
having to look qubit manipulation is a
mind bender as well
a normal logic gate gets a simple set of
inputs and produces one definite output
a quantum gate manipulates an input of
superpositions rotates probabilities and
produces another superposition as its
output
so a quantum computer sets up some
qubits applies quantum gates to entangle
them and manipulate probabilities and
finally measures the outcome collapsing
superpositions to an actual sequence of
zeros and ones
what this means is that you get the
entire lot of calculations that are
possible with your setup all done at the
same time
ultimately you can only measure one of
the results and it will only probably be
the one you want so you may have to
double check and try again
but by cleverly exploiting superposition
and entanglement this can be
exponentially more efficient than would
ever be possible on a normal computer
so while quantum computers will probably
not replace our home computers in some
areas they are vastly superior
one of them is database searching to
find something in a database a normal
computer may have to test every single
one of its entries
quantum algorithms need only the square
root of that time which for large
databases is a huge difference
the most famous use of quantum computers
is roaning i.t security
right now your browsing email and
banking data is being kept secured by an
encryption system in which you give
everyone a public key to encode messages
only you can decode
the problem is that this public key can
actually be used to calculate your
secret private key
luckily doing the necessary math on any
normal computer would literally take
years of trial and error but a quantum
computer with exponential speed up could
do it in a breeze
another really exciting new use is
simulations simulations of the quantum
world are very intense on resources and
even for bigger structures such as
molecules they often lack accuracy
so why not simulate quantum physics with
actual quantum physics
quantum simulations could provide new
insights on proteins that might
revolutionize medicine
right now we don't know if quantum
computers will be just a very
specialized tool or a big revolution for
humanity we have no idea where the
limits of technology are and there's
only one way to find out
this video is supported by the
australian academy of science which
promotes and supports excellence in
science
learn more about this topic and others
like it at nova.org.eu
it was a blast to work with them so go
check out their site our videos are also
made possible by your support on
patreon.com
if you want to support us and become
part of the kotzkazak bird army check
out our patreon page
[Music]